Define HelloRetryRequestInner/Outer messages (#2)
cjpatton/draft-ietf-tls-esni: draft-ietf-tls-esni.md

decreasing order of preference, to be used by the client in subsequent
connection attempts. These are known as the server's "retry configurations".

> If client offers the "encrypted_client-hello" extension and the client-facing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If client offers the "encrypted_client_hello" extension and the client-facing
```

decreasing order of preference, to be used by the client in subsequent
connection attempts. These are known as the server's "retry configurations".

If client offers the "encrypted_client_hello" extension and the client-facing

> server accepts, then the backend server MAY include an "encrypted_client_hello"

Reviewer 2: This seems like it has to be a MUST based on the text below in which I assume rejection if it's absent.

Author: You're right, although the MUST is also conditioned on the backend server sending HRR.  Updated.

### Handling HelloRetryRequest {#client-hrr}

If the server sends a HelloRetryRequest in response to the ClientHello, the
client first checks for the presence of the "encrypted_client_hello" extension.
The presence of this extension is an indication that the client-facing server
accepted ECH and that the backend server sent a HelloRetryRequest. If absent,
then the client presumes rejection and proceeds as if the message was sent by
the client-facing server.

The HelloRetryRequest constructed by the backend server is called the
HelloRetryRequestInner message; and the HelloRetryRequest constructed by the
client-facing server is called the HelloRetryRequestOuter message.

If the client offered ECH in the first ClientHello, then it MUST offer ECH in
the second. Likewise, if the client did not offer ECH in the first ClientHello,
then it MUST NOT not offer ECH in the second.

#### Accepted ECH

> As described in {{sever-hrr}, the HelloRetryRequestInner is encrypted by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described in {{sever-hrr}, the HelloRetryRequestInner handshake message is encrypted by the
```

Reviewer: ... to make clear that the record layer isn't included

backend server and included as the payload of the "encrypted_client_hello"
extension of the HelloRetryRequestOuter. The client decrypts the payload using
the HPKE context it shares with the client-facing server. It begins by exporting
a key and nonce for AEAD decryption:

~~~
    hrr_inner_key = context.Export("hrr inner key", Nk)
    hrr_inner_nonce = context.Export("hrr inner nonce", Nn)
~~~

Here `Nk` and `Nn` denote, respectively, the key and nonce length of the AEAD
algorithm associated with `context`. Let `encrypted_hrr_inner` denote the
extension payload. The client computes

~~~
    HelloRetryRequestInner = Open(hrr_inner_key,
                                  hrr_inner_nonce,
                                  "", // Empty AAD
                                  encrypted_hrr_inner)
~~~

> If decryption fails, then the client aborts with a "TODO" alert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If decryption fails, then the client aborts with a "illegal_parameter" alert.
```

The second ClientHelloOuter contains no extensions except for the

> "encrypted_client_hello" extension with the second ClientHelloInner. The client
> uses HelloRetryRequestInner to construct ClientHelloInner per the rules of
> {{RFC8446}}. It then encodes the second ClientHelloInner as in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"encrypted_client_hello" extension with the second ClientHelloInner. All fields of
the second ClientHelloOuter are set to the same values used in the first ClientHelloOuter.
The client then constructs ClientHelloInner per the rules of {{RFC8446}}, Section 4.1.4. 
It then encodes the second ClientHelloInner as in
```

Reusing fields from the first CH seems simplest, since the server accepts ECH anyway. We might also recommend that the random field be different, but I don't think it matters that much?

Reviewer: (It only affects AAD for the second CH encryption, but that's already different since there are no extensions in this second CH, so 🤷 )

Author: This point was discussed here: https://github.com/tlswg/draft-ietf-tls-esni/issues/374#issuecomment-748522170. David prefers to send a bare-bones CHO2 to reduce implementation complexity.

Reviewer: Right, but what does "bare-bones" mean? You can't *omit* these values, otherwise it's not a CH, right?

Author: A CH with only one extension is still a CH, syntactically speaking. I don't see any problem with doing so. In any case, this is one of the design points we need to escalate.

Author: Clarified that only the extensions field changes in CH02.

### Handling HelloRetryRequest {#client-hrr}

If the server sends a HelloRetryRequest in response to the ClientHello, the
client first checks for the presence of the "encrypted_client_hello" extension.
The presence of this extension is an indication that the client-facing server
accepted ECH and that the backend server sent a HelloRetryRequest. If absent,
then the client presumes rejection and proceeds as if the message was sent by
the client-facing server.

The HelloRetryRequest constructed by the backend server is called the
HelloRetryRequestInner message; and the HelloRetryRequest constructed by the

> client-facing server is called the HelloRetryRequestOuter message.

Reviewer 2: This text needs some work because it implicitly assumes this nested structure.

Author: Can you elaborate? The goal of this paragraph is merely to name HRRInne and HRROuter. How would you rework this text?

Reviewer 2: My point is that you don't tell us that there is an HRRInner and HRROuter. So you need to say that first.

Author: Gotcha. Done.

If the client offered ECH in the first ClientHello, then it MUST offer ECH in
the second. Likewise, if the client did not offer ECH in the first ClientHello,

> then it MUST NOT not offer ECH in the second.

Reviewer 2: This also is unclear without the text ahead. I would either summarize the behavior or have a forward reference.

Author: You know, this paragraph doesn't seem relevant anymore, since the text now prescribes exactly how CHInner and CHOuter are constructed after HRR. I just deleted it.

#### Accepted ECH {#client-hrr-accepted-ech}

As described in {{sever-hrr}, the HelloRetryRequestInner handshake message is
encrypted by the backend server and included as the payload of the
"encrypted_client_hello" extension of the HelloRetryRequestOuter. The client
decrypts the payload using the HPKE context it shares with the client-facing
server. It begins by exporting a key and nonce for AEAD decryption:

~~~
    hrr_inner_key = context.Export("hrr inner key", Nk)
    hrr_inner_nonce = context.Export("hrr inner nonce", Nn)
~~~

Here `Nk` and `Nn` denote, respectively, the key and nonce length of the AEAD
algorithm associated with `context`. Let `encrypted_hrr_inner` denote the
extension payload. The client computes

~~~
    HelloRetryRequestInner = Open(hrr_inner_key,
                                  hrr_inner_nonce,

>                                   "", // Empty AAD

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason not to AAD HRROuter as with CH?

Author: No reason that I see, other than a bit more code complexity. This seems like a sensible precaution to me, so I added it.

                                  encrypted_hrr_inner)
~~~

> If decryption fails, then the client aborts with a "illegal_parameter" alert.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If decryption fails, then the client MUST abort the connection with a "illegal_parameter" alert.
```

Author: Done.

The second ClientHelloOuter is identical to the first, except that the
extensions field contains only the "encrypted_client_hello" extension, which

> contains the second ClientHelloInner. The client uses HelloRetryRequestInner to

Reviewer 2: This seems like it's a problem in that it will have the wrong version, for instance.

Author: In this context the connection is being terminated by the backend server. Thus, the parameters of CHOuter2 don't need to change in response to the HRR. We thought it would be best if CHOuter1 and CHOuter2 had the same parameters. In fact, below we say that the HRROuter SHOULD NOT contain extensions other than "cookie" and "encrypted_client_hello".

Reviewer 2: That's what I'm complaining about. It's not a valid TLS 1.3 CH because it doesn't have supported_versions.

Author: Ah crap. Good catch. Are there any other extensions you can think of that are required?

construct ClientHelloInner per the rules of {{RFC8446}}. It then encodes the
second ClientHelloInner as in {{encoding-inner}}, except that it does not
incorporate any extensions from the ClientHelloOuter (i.e., the

> "ech_outer_extensions" extension is used). It then encrypts the new

Reviewer 2: do you mean "is not used"

Author: Yup! Good catch.

- `enc` is replaced with the empty string.
- `payload` is replaced with the value computed above.

#### Rejected ECH

If the client-facing server sent HelloRetryRequestOuter without the
"encrypted_client_hello" extension, then the client presumes rejection and
constructs the second ClientHelloOuter as described in {{RFC8446}}. In
particular, it MUST copy the "encrypted_client_hello" from the first

> ClientHelloOuter into the second.

Reviewer 2: "copy" seems like a mistake here. As I understand it, this will be undecryptable anyway because of the AAD, so I would prefer random content.

Author: AFAIK this behavior is mandated by 8446. Perhaps we should add an OPEN ISSUE Here and bring it to the list?

Reviewer 2: yeah.

Author: Added a TODO.

non-empty (i.e., the length of the "extension_data" field is non-zero) then the
backend server MUST abort the handshake with an "illegal_parameter" alert.

## Handling HelloRetryRequest {#server-hrr}

The HelloRetryRequest constructed by the backend server is called the
HelloRetryRequestInner message; and the HelloRetryRequest constructed by the
client-facing server is called the HelloRetryRequestOuter message.

If the backend server cannot complete the handshake with the parameters provided
in the ClientHelloInner, then it constructs a HelloRetryRequestInner message in
the usual way and forwards it to the client-facing server. The client-facing
server encrypts this message using a key derived from the HPKE context, as
described below. It then constructs HelloRetryRequestOuter message with an
"encrypted_client_hello" extension containing the ciphertext as its payload. It
then continues the handshake by sending this message to the client.

The payload of the "encrypted_client_hello" extension is constructed as follows.
The client-facing server begins by exporting a key and nonce for AEAD
encryption:

~~~

>     hrr_inner_key = context.Export("hrr inner key", Nk)

Reviewer: Can we point to the previous section where these are derived, rather than duplicate text?

Author: Done. Good call

    hrr_inner_nonce = context.Export("hrr inner nonce", Nn)
~~~

Here `Nk` and `Nn` denote, respectively, the key and nonce length of the AEAD
algorithm associated with `context`. The extension payload is computed as

~~~
    encrypted_hrr_inner = Seal(hrr_inner_key,
                               hrr_inner_nonce,
                               "", // Empty AAD
                               HelloRetryRequestInner)
~~~

The ciphertext `encrypted_hrr_inner` is used as the payload of the
"encrypted_client_hello" extension. When sending this extension, the
HelloRetryRequestOuter MAY also contain a "cookie" extension, but SHOULD NOT

> contain any other extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contain any other extension. If present, the contents of the "cookie" extension MUST 
NOT contain any information included in or derived from ClientHelloInner.
```

Author: Why is this needed? How would it be enforced?

Reviewer: I don't think it can be enforced, but you can imagine a server very stupidly putting the InnerCH in the cookie and sending it back to the client (in plaintext!). The suggestion is to make it crystal clear that this sort of thing is prohibited.

Author: Ack. No change made, but we can discuss it in the actual PR.

After sending HelloRetryRequestOuter, the client-facing server does not repeat
the steps in {{client-facing-server}} with the second ClientHelloOuter. Instead,
it continues with the ECHConfig selection from the first ClientHelloOuter as
follows:

If the client-facing server accepted ECH, it checks the second ClientHelloOuter
also contains the "encrypted_client_hello" extension. If not, it MUST abort the
handshake with a "missing_extension" alert. Otherwise, it checks that

> ClientECH.cipher_suite is unchanged, and that ClientECH.config_id and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ClientECH.cipher_suite and ClientECH.config_id are unchanged, and
```

Author: Ah crap, I need to rebase.

Author: Done.

> ClientECH.enc are empty. If not, it MUST abort the handshake with an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ClientECH.enc is empty. If not, it MUST abort the handshake with an
```

"illegal_parameter" alert.

Finally, it decrypts the new ClientECH.payload as a second message with the
previous HPKE context:

~~~
    EncodedClientHelloInner = context.Open(ClientHelloOuterAAD,
                                           ClientECH.payload)
~~~

ClientHelloOuterAAD is computed as described in {{authenticating-outer}}, but
using the second ClientHelloOuter. If decryption fails, the client-facing
server MUST abort the handshake with a "decrypt_error" alert. Otherwise, it
reconstructs the second ClientHelloInner from the new EncodedClientHelloInner
as described in {{encoding-inner}}, using the second ClientHelloOuter for
any referenced extensions.

The client-facing server then forwards the resulting ClientHelloInner to the
backend server. It forwards all subsequent TLS messages between the client and
backend server unmodified.

If the client-facing server rejected ECH, or if the first ClientHello did not
include an "encrypted_client_hello" extension, the client-facing server

> proceeds with the connection as usual. The server does not decrypt the
> second ClientHello's ClientECH.payload value, if there is one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proceeds with the connection as usual.
```

Author: Done.

non-empty (i.e., the length of the "extension_data" field is non-zero) then the
backend server MUST abort the handshake with an "illegal_parameter" alert.

> ## Handling HelloRetryRequest {#server-hrr}

Reviewer 2: "Handling" is wrong here. You are generating.

Author: Changed to "Sending".

The HelloRetryRequest constructed by the backend server is called the
HelloRetryRequestInner message; and the HelloRetryRequest constructed by the

> client-facing server is called the HelloRetryRequestOuter message.

Reviewer 2: This duplicates text above,

Author: Removed. I thought it would be useful to duplicate this text, but apparently not :)

If the backend server cannot complete the handshake with the parameters provided
in the ClientHelloInner, then it constructs a HelloRetryRequestInner message in
the usual way and forwards it to the client-facing server. The client-facing
server encrypts this message using a key derived from the HPKE context, as
described below. It then constructs HelloRetryRequestOuter message with an
"encrypted_client_hello" extension containing the ciphertext as its payload. It
then continues the handshake by sending this message to the client.

The payload of the "encrypted_client_hello" extension is constructed as follows.
The client-facing server begins by computing `hrr_inner_key` and
`hrr_inner_nonce` as described in {{client-hrr-accepted-ech}}. The extension
payload is then computed as

~~~
    encrypted_hrr_inner = Seal(hrr_inner_key,
                               hrr_inner_nonce,
                               "", // Empty AAD
                               HelloRetryRequestInner)

> ~~~

Reviewer 2: This text is also duplicative.

Author: What does it duplicate? Here we specify the encryption operation; the decryption operation is specified above, in {{client-hrr-accpted-ech}}.

Reviewer 2: I see what you're saying. I don't think this is that helpful a style, but I'll let it go for now.

Author: Ack.

The ciphertext `encrypted_hrr_inner` is used as the payload of the
"encrypted_client_hello" extension. When sending this extension, the
HelloRetryRequestOuter MAY also contain a "cookie" extension, but SHOULD NOT
contain any other extension.

After sending HelloRetryRequestOuter, the client-facing server does not repeat
the steps in {{client-facing-server}} with the second ClientHelloOuter. Instead,
it continues with the ECHConfig selection from the first ClientHelloOuter as

> follows:

Reviewer 2: This seems like it's incompatible with a stateless server, no?

Author: My understanding is that the "cookie" extension would be used to carry state between the two steps.

Reviewer 2: If that's what you expect you should say it.

Author: I changed the text as follows.

> Instead it continues with the ECHConfig selection from the first ClientHelloOuter as follows (servers that handle HelloRetryRequest stateless would use the "cookie" extension to carry state required for resuming selection):                                                                                                                   
> ...

Does that work?

for ExtensionType (defined in {{!RFC8446}}):

1. encrypted_client_hello(0xfe0a), with "TLS 1.3" column values set to

>    "CH, HRR, EE", and "Recommended" column set to "Yes". [[TODO: Should "HRR" be
>    "SH"?]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   "CH, HRR, EE", and "Recommended" column set to "Yes". 
```

Reviewer: I don't think so :)
